---
title: "02: Non-zero system"
type: learn
slug: /02
weight: 3
---

# 01: A Non-zero system 

Biggest learning this week was to develop a non-zero system. 1 > 0. Remember that. 


## Consuming

*Comment from reddit*

This is maybe best [reddit comment](https://www.reddit.com/r/getdisciplined/comments/1q96b5/i_just_dont_care_about_myself/) I've ever read. It comes from [ryans01](https://www.reddit.com/user/ryans01).

Here's a summary of the 4 rules in my own words: 

**Rule 1:** be consistent, one is better than zero. Do at least something that can help you toward your goal or dream each day. Want to lose wait? Exercise. You don't have to run a marathon. Do a pushup. Take a walk. 

Want to learn to program? Write a line of code. Build a silly website. 

You now live in a non-zero system. 

**Rule 2:** become your own best friend. There are 3 of you - past you, present you, and future you. Ever decision you make should be to benefit your future self. 

Life is a all about bets, your decisions are bets against your future self. Thank past you for helping future you, and you'll develop gratitude. 

**Rule 3**: Forgive yourself. Self-pity accomplishes nothing. 

If you're disappointed in yourself, you will be less productive. And that's bad for the non-zero system. 

**Rule 4**: Exercise and books. When you exercise daily, you get smarter. It's more for your mind than for your body. 

All-time quote about reading: *reading is the fucking warp whistle from Super Mario 3.* It's true. 

*Superforecasting by Tetlock and Gardner* 

Rented the book from library, listened to a podcast about it, and [read these book notes](http://scattered-thoughts.net/blog/2016/01/28/notes-on-superforecasting-the-art-and-science-of-prediction/). It's a little dense, too many examples, but some big ideas that are important: 

- triage: don't waste time trying to predict the unpredictable, focus on the right things
- it's all about balance - overconfidence and underconfidence, perspectives, evidence 
- if facts change, you need to change 
- understand basic probability or odds

```60/40 is a 40% chance, 4 / 6+4=10, 25/1 is 3.85% chance, 1 / 25+1=26```

*Fermi-ize example: how many piano tuners are in Chicago?* 

Break it down into smaller questions, what must be true for me to answer this question? 

- number of pianos in Chicago
- how often are pianos tuned each year
- how long does it take to tune a piano 
- how mamny hours a year the average piano tuner works 

Breaking down the question determines what is knowable and unknowable. 


*Charlie Munger* 

Still reading about Munger. I've read lots of [notes](https://old.ycombinator.com/munger.html), bits and pieces of this [misjudgement speech](http://web.archive.org/web/20151004200748/http://law.indiana.edu/instruction/profession/doc/16_1.pdf), and some of [Tren Griffin's exhaustive list of posts](https://25iq.com/2015/10/30/a-dozen-things-ive-learned-from-charlie-munger-distilled-to-less-than-500-words/). 

A few things I'm chewing on: 

- avoid extreme ideologies, it gets you stuck on ideas
- try to expose yourself to alternate viewpoints 
- if you're confident about something, you should be able to counter it or argue against it, if you can't - you don't fully understand what you're confident about 
- determination is important, keep it at it, take a break, but keep trying 
- rub your nose in your mistakes, own it 
- mistakes of omission happen, you never get over it, but you do less of it 

This [list of quotes](https://25iq.com/quotations/charlie-munger/) is incredible.

*Quote I'm thinking about* 

- Practically everybody (1) overweighs the stuff that can be numbered, because it yields to the statistical techniques they’re taught in academia, and (2) doesn’t mix in the hard-to-measure stuff that may be more important. That is a mistake I’ve tried all my life to avoid, and I have no regrets for having done that. - Munger on statistics 


*Metaphor that made sense* 

- I believe managing is like holding a dove in your hand. If you hold it too tightly you kill it, but if you hold it too loosely, you lose it. - Tommy Lasorda 


## Creating

- updated [Dadgum Box Scores with more info](https://fyi.dadgumboxscores.com/update-04/)
- researched more on R, learning how to make some graphs 

*R Programming Language* 

- Statsbylopez sports [course](https://statsbylopez.com/stats-sports-class/)
- Made a [graph with a vertical line](https://twitter.com/dadgumboxscores) 

```
library(ggplot2)
library(hrbrthemes)

ow.data <- read.csv(file="try.csv")
View(ow.data)

ggplot(try.data, aes(x = game, y= Three, colour = variable)) + 
  geom_line(aes(y = pct, colour = "pct"), size=1.5) +
  geom_line(aes(y = att, colour = "att"), linetype="dotted", size=1.5) +
  labs(x="Game Number", y="3PT Pct and Attempt Rate",  
	title="3PT Percentage and Attempt Rate by Carolina Opponents", 
	subtitle="Percentage of 3PT shots made and attempted by 2017-18 opponents game-by-game",
       caption="Brought to you by dadgumboxscores.com")  +
	scale_x_continuous(name="Game.Number", breaks=c(1:37), labels=c(1:37),limits=c(1,37)) +
	scale_colour_manual("", 
                      breaks = c("pct", "att"),
                      values = c("pct"="#66CC99", "att"="#CC6666")) +
       geom_vline(xintercept=c(23,24), linetype="dashed") + 
	theme_ipsum(grid="XY") 
``` 

- Need to keep going, try the sports course and make more graphs

## Takeaways 

- It's all about balance - moderation
- Be a generalist. 
- Keep trying, keep trying, have some grit. 
- Try to do one-thing a day to help future you - exercise, read/learn, eat healthy. 